Polish benchmark and include some figures in README (#20)
github/rust-gems: crates/bpe/README.md

## Benchmarks

We ran several benchmarks to compare performance between different encoders and with the tiktoken library:

> - The first measuers encoding runtime for our different encoders and the tiktoken Rust implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The first measures encoding runtime for our different encoders and the tiktoken Rust implementation.
```

>   This shows a ~3.5x performance increase for our fastest correct encoder comapred to the tiktoken library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This shows a ~3.5x performance improvement for our fastest correct encoder compared to the tiktoken library.
```

- The second measures incremental encoding runtime, where the text is built up byte-by-byte.
  This mode is not available in tiktoken, which only supports counting/encoding a complete text.

> - The third measures interval counting runtime, where the token count for slices of an original text are determined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The third measures interval counting runtime, where tokens of sub-slices of a fixed text are counted.
```

  After the initial tokenization of the text, token counting for slices is typically constant time.
  This mode is not available in tiktoken, which only supports counting/encoding a complete text.

> All benchmarks were run on a MacBook Pro M1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All benchmarks were run single-threaded on a MacBook Pro M1.
```

### Encoding

Encoding is computing the tokens for a given text.

> This benchmark uses several encoders:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This benchmark compares several encoders:
```

> - The backtracking encoder uses a backtracking algorithm based on a string matching automaton.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The backtracking encoder uses the backtracking algorithm with memorisation based on top of a string matching automaton.
```

> - The heap encoder uses a priority heap to implement the traditional BPE algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The heap encoder uses a priority heap and a bitmask to represent token positions to implement the traditional BPE algorithm.
```

> - The table encoder uses a dynamic programming algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The table encoder implements the raw dynamic programming algorithm proposed above.
```

> Two additional encoders are included that are faster but do not always give exact results:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two additional encoders are included that are faster but deviate from the original BPE encoding strategy:
```

> - The greedy encoder uses a left-to-right greedy algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The greedy encoder picks the left-longest token.
```

- The minimal encoder computes an encoding with the minimal number of tokens.

The benchmark measured the runtime of encoding of slices of lengths 10, 100, 1000, and 1000 from a random 20000 token original text using the o200k token set.
(All encodings were computed from scratch for each slice.)

The graph below shows encoding runtime vs slice length.

> All encoders show similar runtime increases with increasing slice length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All encoders show the expected linear runtime complexity.
```

The backtracking encoder, the fastest encoder that still returns correct results, shows a performance gain of approximately 3.5x compared to tiktoken.
The fully dynamic programming solution and the heap implementation are still quite competitive to TikToken (especially for smaller inputs).
If the requirement of correct BPE output can be relaxed, then the Greedy approach or the minimal encoding approach are the clear winners.

![encoding runtime comparison](./benches/result/encoding-o200k.svg)

### Incremental encoding

> Incremental encoding tokenizes a text to which bytes are appended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incremental encoding tokenizes a text while appending bytes. This type of algorithm is interesting for use cases where a certain token budget must not be exceeded.
```

This benchmark uses two encoders:

> - The backtracking encoder, which retokenizes the text froms cratch every time it changes.

Reviewer: mmm. this statement is not correct :)
Whenever it detects that it made a decision which is no longer compatible with new bytes, then it backtracks.
But it backtracks with memorisation which means it tries to compute only those states from the dynamic programming encoder which are actually necessary to find the correct solution...

The benchmark measured the runtime of encoding of slices of lengths 10, 100, 1000, and 1000 from a random 20000 token original using the o200k token set.
The backtracking encoder encoded the final text in one go.
The appending encoder got the text bytes on by one.

The graph below shows encoding runtime vs slice length.
Runtime of both encoders grows similarly with slice length.
The incremental encoder shows a constant factor overhead.
Note that this is still a huge win for incremental use cases, which would otherwise require retokenization after each append, resulting in a quadratic slowdown.

![appending runtime comparison](./benches/result/appending-o200k.svg)

### Interval counting

Interval counting is counting the tokens for a slice of an original text.
This benchmark uses two encoders:

- The backtracking encoder encodes the slice from scratch.
  This is similar to what one has to do with other libraries, like `tiktoken`.
- The interval encoder encodes the original text once and reuses that encoding to count tokens for intervals of the original text.
  The initial encoding time for the interval encoder is comparable to that of the backtracking encoder.

> The benchmark measured the runtime of counting o200k tokens on slices of lengths 10, 100, 1000, and 1000 from a random 20000 token original text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benchmark measured the runtime of counting o200k tokens on slices of lengths 10, 100, 1000, and 10000 from a random 20000 token original text.
```

As can be seen, our Backtracking implementation beats the TikToken Rust implementation by ~4x.
And even the fully dynamic programming solution is faster with a more consistent runtime.
The tuned heap implementation is still quite competitive to TikToken (especially for smaller inputs).
If the requirement of correct BPE output can be relaxed, then the Greedy approach or the minimal encoding approach are the clear winners.

> ### Counting results

Reviewer: Maybe mention that we are not using the original tiktoken implementation, but some fork which provides a wrapper... (maybe it is easy to migrate to the original implementation now?)

Author: I've added a note about that in 537699192c9eff01f906e785f549f06eb88217af.

> Results for counting o200k tokens for random 10000 byte slices. The setup time of the interval encoder is comparable to backtracking. After setup counting of slices of the original data are approximately constant time.

Reviewer: `10000`?
The graph mentions different sizes along the x-axis.
Can you describe the set up a bit more clearly? (Was the total text fixed sized and then we picked a random sub-slice and the sub-slice size varied?)

![counting runtime comparison](./benches/result/counting-o200k.svg)

> ### Encoding results

Reviewer: maybe add a worst case example for tiktoken?
(some string without whitespaces)

Author: I tried that. This was the same as the encoding benchmark but all inputs were taken from a random ascii string without whitespace. The factor increased a bit (close to 6x) but the curves seem fairly similar to the encoding results.

Reviewer: mmm. What I tested some time ago was a string which was the concatenation of all unicode characters. That input never finished with the tiktoken lib... I think the regex simply returned a super large sub-chunk on which the quadratic encoder was then running. This obviously will take forever...

Author: Maybe the ascii is too simple then. I found a way to sample unicode. I'll try that and see if it makes a difference.

Author: I could not replicate what you're describing using random Unicode strings. I'll leave this for now and maybe get back to it if we want to highlight this on the blog post.

Reviewer: well, I didn't use random unicode strings... 🤷

Results for encoding o200k tokens for random 1000 bytes. The backtracking encoder consistently outperforms tiktoken by a constant factor.

> ![encoding runtime comparison](./benches/result/encoding-o200k.svg)

Reviewer: The colors are pretty difficult to distinguish. Can we use differently dotted lines, etc. to distinguish them more?

> ### Incremental encoding results

Reviewer: Nit: maybe merge with the previous section?

The important point here is not so much the incremental encoding, but the reverse encoding aspect I think.
I guess it requires a bit of explanation...

Oh... did I check that it returns the same result for "random" input?
E.g. when we have all whitespace, then the reverse encoder must move the longest merged token correctly to the front.

Author: Not sure what you mean? The appending encoder doesn't do reverse encoding afaik. We also have the prepending one, although that one's not included in the benchmark now.
